Add Connection Pool and Execution Time Articles (#12)
xsleaks/wiki: content/docs/attacks/timing-attacks/execution-timing.md

+++
title = "Execution Timing"
description = ""
date = "2020-07-21"
category = "attacks"
attacks = [
    "dom property",
]
defenses = [
    "same-site cookies",
    "sec-fetch metadata",
]
menu = "main"
+++

Measuring the time of JavaScript execution in a browser can give attackers information on when certain events are triggered, and how long some operations take. 

## Timing the Event Loop

> JavaScript concurrency model is based on a [single-threaded event loop](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/EventLoop) which means it can only run one task at a time. If, for example, some time-consuming task blocks the event loop, the user can perceive a freeze on a page as a result of the UI thread being starved. Other tasks must wait until the blocking one runs to conclusion. Each browser implement different [process model](https://www.chromium.org/developers/design-documents/process-models), which means some web sites might run in different threads (and event loops) depending on their interactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JavaScript concurrency model is based on a [single-threaded event loop](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/EventLoop) which means it can only run one task at a time. If, for example, some time-consuming task blocks the event loop, the user can perceive a freeze on a page as a result of the UI thread being starved. Other tasks must wait until the blocking one runs to conclusion. Each browser implements different [process models](https://www.chromium.org/developers/design-documents/process-models), which means some web sites might run in different threads (and event loops) depending on their relations.
```

Some attacks exploit this model to steal secrets from a cross-origin page:

> - Infer how long code from a different origin takes to run, by measuring how long it takes to run next in the event pool [^1] [^2]. The attacker keeps sending events to the event loop with fixed properties, which will eventually be dispatched if the pool is empty. Other origins will dispatch events to the same pool, and this is where an attacker infers the timing difference by detecting if a delay occurred with one of its tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Infer how long code from a different origin takes to run by measuring how long it takes to run next in the event pool [^1] [^2]. The attacker keeps sending events to the event loop with fixed properties, which will eventually be dispatched if the pool is empty. Other origins will dispatch events to the same pool, and this is where an attacker infers the timing difference by detecting if a delay occurred with one of its tasks.
```

- Steal a secret from a cross-origin page if the said secret is being compared by an attacker-controlled string. The leak is a result of comparing timing differences in the event loop of a char-by-char string comparison [^2] (using the previous technique). In browsers without process isolation, cross-window communications between different origins will run in the same thread, thus sharing the same event loop.

{{< hint warning >}}
This attack is no longer possible in Browsers with process isolation mechanisms in place. Such mechanisms are only present in Chromium-Based browsers with [Site Isolation](https://www.chromium.org/Home/chromium-security/site-isolation) and *soon* in Firefox under [Project Fission](https://wiki.mozilla.org/Project_Fission).
{{< /hint >}}

## Service Workers

> [Service Workers](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Service_Worker_API) can be abused by attackers to measure the timing of javascript execution in certain scenarios [^4]. They serve as a `proxy` between the browser and the network and allow applications to intercept any network requests made by the main thread (document). This feature is useful to offer offline solutions in web applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Service Workers](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Service_Worker_API) can be used to offer offline solutions to web applications but it might be abused by attackers to measure the timing of javascript execution[^4]. They serve as a `proxy` between the browser and the network and allow applications to intercept any network requests made by the main thread (document).
```

To make a timing measurement an attacker can perform the following steps:

1. The attacker registers a service worker in one of its domains (attacker.com).
2. In the main document, the attacker issues a navigation (window.open) to the target website and instructs the Service Worker to start a timer.

> 3. When the navigation starts loading the attacker will navigate the reference obtained in step 2 to a page handled by the service worker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. When the new window starts loading the attacker will navigate the reference obtained in step 2 to a page handled by the service worker.
```

4. When the request performed in step 3 arrives to the Service Worker it will return a 204 (No Content) response, which will abort the navigation.
5. At this point the Service Worker will collect a measurement from the timer started in step 2. This measurement will be affected by how long JavaScript blocked the navigation for.

Since the navigation won't actually happen, steps from 3 to 5 can be repeated to get more measurements on successive JavaScript execution timings.

### Detect a Navigation

> Abusing Service Workers with the attack [described above]({{< ref "#service-workers" >}}), specifically in step 5, an attacker could detect whether navigating the hash triggered a navigation on another site [^4].

Reviewer: How? This will only work if the hash navigation ends up being a full page navigation to an attacker page, right?

Author: That was what made sense to me in the first place, but I am not so sure that is what the original issues says:

> Same as the first two above, but using window.open() or window.opener instead. To detect when window.onload triggers, we can issue a navigation to a page that has a service worker registered, and have the service worker return a 204 response. This will make the navigation not actually happen, but my timing how long the browser took to navigate to the service worker we can approximate both, how long it took to load, and whether navigating the hash triggered a navigation or not on another site. Happy to make a PoC for this, but I hope this is self explanatory.

Only because, detecting a navigation to an attacker site should be trivial (to the attacker) without service workers. The attacker controls the server, so it should know what requests arrive there.

Author: Removed it 533604c

To make a timing measurement an attacker can perform the following steps:

1. The attacker registers a service worker in one of its domains (attacker.com).
2. In the main document, the attacker issues a navigation to the target website and starts a [clock](https://TODO).
3. The Service Worker will catch the request performed in step 2, check the [clock](https://TODO) and return a 204 (No Content) response to the main document.
4. The Execution timing is the subtraction of the time registered in 3. with the time registered in 2.

The navigation won't actually happen, but by timing how long the browser took to navigate to the Service Worker it's possible to time the page execution.

<!--TODO(manuelvsousa): This can also be used to detect a navigation. Maybe we should add it to the navigations article as well? -->

> ## CSS Selectors Short-circuit Timing

Reviewer 2: I discussed this section with @manuelvsousa here is a brief summary:
* The XS-Leak here is **cross-origin timing** not *CSS Selector* injection
* *CSS Selector* is a great example of costly operation, rather than XS-Leak itself, and which can be detected cross-origin
* While Site-Isolation will protect some of the timing techniques, it can still be detected cross-site using other XS-Leaks, for example:
    * performance drops
    * onload events inside an iframe

As a suggestion for the fix:
* Move the `CSS Selectors Short-circuit Timing` to `Examples` section
* Specify the exact timing that the article talks about, since this is the most important of the article (not what is possible to leak, but how!)

As a suggestion for improvements:
* The mentioned `CSS Selector` injection trick shares the same principle as [Blind Regular Expression Injection Attack](https://diary.shift-js.info/blind-regular-expression-injection/), both can become very costly depending on the user information, and both can be detected cross-origin. It would be really nice to provide it as an example since searches that allow Regular Expression are not that uncommon.
* I invented a [technique](https://gist.github.com/terjanq/60b4ae4ce7491a0f3104e62e2ab07c87#file-iframes-html-L11-L33) for timing costly operations per origin, that bypasses Same-Site Isolation Policy. The principle of the attack is:
    * Load an `origin A` with a costly operation in a new tab/iframe. 
    * Wait for the page to start expensive calculation via timeout
    * Try to load the `origin A` inside an iframe
    * Because of how the calculations are performed, the framed `origin A` will only start loading when the blocking calculation finishes. Hence, the malicious website can watch for the `onload` event on the iframe, regardless of `X-Frames-Options` header that will not affect the attack.
   * **To prevent against the technique, the website must combine `XFO` with `COOP`**

Proof of concept for measuring `google.com` domain
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11320896/92405619-48323780-f136-11ea-8ab0-5c65f0f45f4b.png)

+++
title = "Execution Timing"
description = ""
date = "2020-07-21"
category = "attacks"
attacks = [
    "dom property",
]
defenses = [
    "same-site cookies",
    "sec-fetch metadata",
]
menu = "main"
+++

Measuring the time of JavaScript execution in a browser can be give attackers information when certain events are triggered, and how long some operations take. 

## Timing the Event Loop

JavaScript concurrency model is based on a [single-threaded event loop](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/EventLoop) which means it can only run one task at a time. If some time-consuming task blocks the event loop, the user senses a freeze on a page, as a result of the UI thread being blocked. Other tasks must wait until the blocking one completes its task. 

Some attacks abuse this model to steal secrets from a cross-origin page:

- When an attacker controls a string that is compared to a secret in a different origin, it might be possible to measure the comparison time of those strings [^2].

> - An attacker might be able to infer how long code from a different origin takes to run, by measuring how long it takes to run next in the event pool [^1]. The attacker keeps sending events to the event loop with fixed properties, which will eventually be dispatched if the pool is empty. Other origins will dispatch events to the same pool, and this is where an attacker infers the timing difference by detecting if a delay occurred with one of its tasks.

Author: Fix it in 48590a4. Please, check it carefully since it was a considerable change

{{< hint warning >}}

> This attack is no longer possible in Browsers with process isolation mechanisms in place. Such mechanisms are only present in Chromium-Based browsers with [Site Isolation](https://www.chromium.org/Home/chromium-security/site-isolation) and *soon* in Firefox under [Project Fission](https://wiki.mozilla.org/Project_Fission).

Author: Yes, but WebKit is not alone. Firefox does not have a site isolation policy in place yet as the article says :), and I believe it might take some time? I can't find [anything specific](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=1451850), but the testing for this feature stated in the summer last year.

{{< /hint >}}

## Service Workers

[Service Workers](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Service_Worker_API) can be abused by attackers to measure the timing of javascript execution in certain scenarios [^4]. They serve as a `proxy` between the browser and the network and allow applications to intercept any network requests made by the main thread (document). This feature is useful to offer offline solutions in web applications.

To make a timing measurement an attacker can perform the following steps:

1. The attacker registers a service worker in one of its domains (attacker.com).

> 2. In the main document, the attacker issues a navigation (window.open) to the target website.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. In the main document, the attacker issues a navigation (window.open) to the target website and instructs the Service Worker to start a timer.
```

> 3. When the navigation starts loading the attacker will navigate the reference obtained in step 2 to a page caught by the service worker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. When the navigation starts loading the attacker will navigate the reference obtained in step 2 to a page handled by the service worker.
```

> 4. When the request performed in step 3 arrives to the Service Worker it will make the request return a 204 (No Content) response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. When the request performed in step 3 arrives to the Service Worker it will return a 204 (No Content) response, which will abort the navigation.
```

> 5. TODO @empijei <!--TODO(empijei): Can you complete this step? -->

Reviewer: 5. At this point the Service Worker will collect a measurement from the timer started in step 2. This measurement will be affected by how long JavaScript blocked the navigation for.

Author: Fixed in e58c9f6

> The navigation won't actually happen, but by timing how long the browser took to navigate to the Service Worker it's possible to time the page execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the navigation won't actually happen, steps from 3 to 5 can be repeated to get more measurements on successive JavaScript execution timings.
```

> <!--TODO(manuelvsousa): This can also be used to detect a navigation. Maybe we should add it to the navigations article as well? -->
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: I think it is fine keeping it just here for now.

Author: Added a small sub section with a sentence in b89f642. Note sure if it's englithning enough, but I did not want to get into details on a specific scenario

> ## CSS Injections

Reviewer: I wonder, since this requires a pre-existing vulnerability, if it is worth mentioning amidst the other XS-Leaks or if we should maybe be clearer on the separation from the title or the description or if we might want to disregard it completely.

What do you think?

Author: We have a couple of XS-Leaks that depend on stuff like that (css injections or markup injection). I think we should discuss this one as it might have broader implications.

This should be clearer, that's for sure.

Author: I added a new coloured hint in the beginning of each section naming the requirement. Later we can apply a better organisation, but for know, only a few XS-Leaks have other vulns as requirements.

> Certain XS-Leaks can be preformed if a CSS Injection is possible [^6]. Among the different CSS Injection vectors, the most noticeable one is abusing CSS Selectors. They can be used as an expression to match certain HTML elements. The selector `input[value^="a"]` will be matched if the value of an `input` tag with starts with the character "a". If a match occurs, attackers could then trigger a request to one of their websites using background, @import, etc to leak that occurrence. The matching process can be easily brute-forced, and extended to the full string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Certain XS-Leaks can be preformed if a CSS Injection is possible [^6]. Among the different CSS Injection vectors, the most noticeable one is abusing CSS Selectors. They can be used as an expression to match certain HTML elements. The selector `input[value^="a"]` will be matched if the value of an `input` tag starts with the character "a". If a match occurs, attackers could then trigger a request to one of their websites using background, @import, etc to leak that occurrence. The matching process can be easily brute-forced, and extended to the full string.
```

> The attacker is able to inject CSS and control the execution time with the following selector will spend more time running if a `main` tag with `id='site-main'` exists:

Reviewer: I did not understand this sentence.

Author: The last sentence was something that was forgotten. My bad.

Fixed the group of sentences in 2772a5a, hopefully it's better now

> ### jQuery, CSS Selectors & Short-circuit Timing

Reviewer: This also requires the attacker to have another vuln. I would honestly split this stuff (requiring other vulns) into a separate article that has an intro that specifies the pre-requisite and why these attacks are different from all the others listed in the wiki.

Author: Linked to https://github.com/xsleaks/wiki/pull/12#discussion_r492675913

{{< /hint >}}

{{< hint info >}}
In browsers with process isolation mechanisms, [Service Workers]({{< ref "execution-timing.md#service-workers" >}}) can be abused to obtain the execution timing measurement or tricks like [Busy Event Loop tricks]({{< ref "#busy-event-loop" >}}) to circumvent Site Isolation.
{{< /hint >}}

## ReDoS

Regular Expression Denial of Service (ReDoS) it's an attack which result in a Denial of Service in applications that allow Regex as user input [^2] [^5]. The DoS results from an injected Regex that would run in exponential time. Some attacks applied this principle into leaking information: The attacker's injection cause a DoS if the Regex matches a character in some secret and computes quickly otherwise. This could happen in both client and server side.

### Busy Event Loop

Attackers can make the [event loop busy](https://gist.github.com/terjanq/60b4ae4ce7491a0f3104e62e2ab07c87#file-iframes-html-L11-L33) with a long computation Regex. This is a trick to circumvent Site Isolation as an attacker origin can mess with the execution of another website. The attack works as follows:

> 1. Navigate the target website away with `window.open` or inside an iframe (if [Framing Protections](https://TODO) are **not** in place).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Navigate the target website in a separate window with `window.open` or inside an iframe (if [Framing Protections](https://TODO) are **not** in place).
```

2. Wait for the long computation to start.

> 3. Load the target website inside an iframe (regardless of any [Framing Protections](https://TODO)). An attacker can detect if step 1 is still computing by checking if the iframe started loading (onload). Since both navigations occurred within same-site, they run in the same thread and share the same event loop (they can block each other), as Site Isolation is not enforced.

Reviewer: Isn't both onload/onerror in this case? (We are ignoring XFO)

Author: I don't think I got the question. Why onerror?

Here is a small code example of what the text tries to describe.

```
open("https://research.mvs.re/javascript-execution/?coop=0")
var x = document.createElement('iframe');
x.src = "https://research.mvs.re/javascript-execution/?coop=0";
document.body.appendChild(x);
start = performance.now();
x.onload = () => console.log(performance.now() - start)
```

> 3. Load the target website inside an iframe (regardless of any [Framing Protections](https://TODO)). An attacker can detect if step 1 is still computing by checking if the iframe started loading (onload). Since both navigations occurred within same-site, they run in the same thread and share the same event loop (they can block each other), as Site Isolation is not enforced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Load the target website inside an iframe (regardless of any [Framing Protections](https://TODO)). An attacker can detect if step 1 is still computing by checking if the iframe started loading (onload). Since both navigations occurred within the same context and they are same-origin, they run in the same thread and share the same event loop (they can block each other), as Site Isolation is not enforced.
```
I think they need to be spawned by the same tab or they might not share the eventloop, are you sure being same-origin suffices?

Author: This topic is a bit complicated, so the answer here depends on a lot of scenarios. Firstly, I believe the answer is YES and NO :). They need to be spawned by the same tab (click, window.open) BUT I believe this is not always the case, since processes are not infinite and Chrome often reuses them. This is a practise copied from the [old process model](https://www.chromium.org/developers/design-documents/process-models).

Regarding Site Isolation this is what Chromium docs say:

> Note that a page from one site may reuse a process that has already been used for that same site, and we aggressively reuse processes in this way for subframes when possible.  Processes will not be reused for cross-site pages. Status: On desktop, we isolate all sites, allowing process reuse only for pages from the same site.  On Android, only a subset of sites end up in dedicated processes.

So yeah, if you are lucky, you don't need to have a connection with a tab, and in that case being same-origin suffices if you end up in a reused process.

I will change same-origin with same-site which is the correct group Site Isolation uses. I can add Site Isolation reference to this sentece, but I think it might not be relevant to the attack.

btw here is the testing site I talked about, it can be used to reproduce some of the shared event loops behaviours: https://thesis.mvs.re/process/

Author: I fixed same-origin to same-site, and I did not add a reference to chromium. I did some testing, and it's not easy to end up in a reused process and I believe if that happens, it does not really affect the attack.
